[Docs] Data model (#1374)
wasp-lang/wasp: web/docs/database/crud.md

---
title: Automatic CRUD
---

import { Required } from '@site/src/components/Required';
import { ShowForTs } from '@site/src/components/TsJsHelpers';

> Writing similar [Queries and Actions](/docs/database/operations) sometimes gets tiresome, especially if they are really simple. This is where Automatic CRUD really shines!

Reviewer: I would motivate it differently:

> If you wrote a few full-stack apps, you probably noticed that some things tend to repeat: listing some data, creating new data, editing it and deleting it. We wanted to make it easier to handle these boring bits by offering a higher level concept Automatic CRUD.

Something along those lines, change it to what sounds good to you.

    },
    get: {},
    create: {
      overrideFn: import { createTask } from "@server/tasks.js",
    },
    update: {},
  },
}
```

1. It uses default implementation for `getAll`, `get`, and `update`,
2. ... while specifying a custom implementation for `create`.
3. `getAll` will be public (no auth needed), while the rest of the operations will be private.

Here's what it looks like when visualized:

<ImgWithCaption alt="Automatic CRUD with Wasp" source="img/crud_diagram.png" caption="Visualization of the Tasks crud declaration"/>

We can now use the CRUD queries and actions we just specified in our client code.

Keep reading for an example of Automatic CRUD in action, or skip ahead for the [Options reference](#options-reference)

## Example: A Simple TODO App

Let's create a full-app example that uses automatic CRUD. We'll stick to using the `Task` entity from the previous example, but we'll add a `User` entity and enable [username and password](/docs/language/features#username-and-password) based auth.

<ImgWithCaption alt="Automatic CRUD with Wasp" source="img/crud-guide.gif" caption="We are building a simple tasks app with username based auth"/>

### Creating the App

> We can start by running `wasp new tasksCrudApp` and then we'll add the following to our `main.wasp` file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can start by running `wasp new tasksCrudApp` and then adding the following to the `main.wasp` file:
```

    throw new HttpError(401, "User not authenticated.");
  }

  const { description, isDone } = args;
  const { Task } = context.entities;

  return await Task.create({
    data: {
      description,
      isDone,
      // Connect the task to the user that is creating it
      user: {
        connect: {
          id: context.user.id,
        },
      },
    },
  });
};
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="ts" label="TypeScript">

```ts title=src/server/tasks.ts {23-28}
import type { CreateAction } from "@wasp/crud/Tasks";
import type { Task } from "@wasp/entities";
import HttpError from "@wasp/core/HttpError.js";

type CreateTaskInput = { description: string; isDone: boolean };

export const createTask: CreateAction<CreateTaskInput, Task> = async (
  args,
  context
) => {
  if (!context.user) {
    throw new HttpError(401, "User not authenticated.");
  }

  const { description, isDone } = args;
  const { Task } = context.entities;

  return await Task.create({
    data: {
      description,
      isDone,
      // Connect the task to the user that is creating it
      user: {
        connect: {
          id: context.user.id,
        },
      },
    },
  });
};
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

> We made a custom `create` operation because we want to make sure that the task is connected to the user that is creating it. In the current iteration of CRUD operations that is not supported by default. Read more about the [default implementations](/docs/language/features#which-operations-are-supported).

Reviewer: Update the link to the default implementations

**get** - returns one entity based on the `id` field

```ts
// ...
// Wasp uses the field marked with `@id` in Prisma schema as the id field.
return Task.findUnique({ where: { id: args.id } });
```

**getAll** - returns all entities

```ts
// ...

// If the operation is not public, Wasp checks if an authenticated user
// is making the request.

return Task.findMany();
```

**create** - creates a new entity

```ts
// ...
return Task.create({ data: args.data });
```

**update** - updates an existing entity

```ts
// ...
// Wasp uses the field marked with `@id` in Prisma schema as the id field.
return Task.update({ where: { id: args.id }, data: args.data });
```

**delete** - deletes an existing entity

```ts
// ...
// Wasp uses the field marked with `@id` in Prisma schema as the id field.
return Task.delete({ where: { id: args.id } });
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

:::info Current Limitations
In the default `create` and `update` implementations, we are saving all of the data that the client sends to the server. This is not always desirable, i.e. in the case when the client should not be able to modify all of the data in the entity.

> [In the future](#/docs/guides/crud#future-of-crud-operations-in-wasp), we are planning to add validation of action input, where only the data that the user is allowed to change will be saved.

Reviewer: Update the link

- `entity: Entity` <Required />

  The entity to which the CRUD operations will be applied.

- `operations: { [operationName]: CrudOperationOptions }` <Required />

  The operations to be generated. The key is the name of the operation, and the value is the operation configuration.

  - The possible values for `operationName` are:
    - `getAll`
    - `get`
    - `create`
    - `update`
    - `delete`
  - `CrudOperationOptions` can have the following fields:
    - `isPublic: bool` - Whether the operation is public or not. If it is public, no auth is required to access it. If it is not public, it will be available only to authenticated users. Defaults to `false`.
    - `overrideFn: ServerImport` - The import statement of the optional override implementation in Node.js.

#### Defining the overrides

Like with actions and queries, you can define the implementation in a Javascript/Typescript file. The overrides are functions that take the following arguments:

- `args`

  The arguments of the operation i.e. the data sent from the client.

- `context`

  Context contains the `user` making the request and the `entities` object with the entity that's being operated on.

<ShowForTs>

> You can also import types for each of the functions you want to override from `@wasp/crud/{crud name}`. The available types are:

Reviewer: I would wrap this Typescript info with `<ShowForTs>`

Author: It is, line 659 :smile:
